[title]Girls and Occupational Choice: Anti-Sexism in Action in a Curriculum Development Project
[content]Author(s): Lynne A. Chisholm and Janet Holland
Source: British Journal of Sociology of Education, Vol. 7, No. 4 (1986), pp. 353-365
Published by: Taylor & Francis, Ltd.
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392926
Accessed: 18-10-2019 16:33 UTC
REFERENCES
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/1392926?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Taylor & Francis, Ltd. is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
British Journal of Sociology of Education
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 British Journal of Sociology of Education, Vol. 7, No. 4, 1986 353
 Girls and Occupational Choice: anti-sexism in action
 in a curriculum development project
 LYNNE A. CHISHOLM & JANET HOLLAND, Department of the Sociology of
 Education, Institute of Education, University of London
 ABSTRACT This paper is an interim report on the Girls and Occupational Choice
 Project at the Institute of Education, London. The research design and methods used are
 briefly described but the paper focuses on the action research component of this project, and
 discusses anti-sexist curriculum development and implementation in a number of schools.
 The emphasis is on methodological and political issues which arise in doing anti-sexist
 action research in the educational setting.
 Introduction
 In the tradition of action research the Girls and Occupational Choice Project was
 designed to investigate a social phenomenon whilst simultaneously attempting to
 change the situation. This is an interim report of progress in which the aim is to
 unpack that statement through a description of the project as anti-sexist action
 research in the educational context.
 The concept, structure and process of schooling and education remain male-
 dominated to an extraordinary degree. From the standpoint of a discipline which
 has never yet been able to reach consensus on its fundamental character, it is
 nevertheless possible to argue that "patriarchy is the education paradigm"
 (Spender, 1981: 157). Confronted with the massive scale of sexism within
 educational structure and practice, it is not surprising that many feminists
 concluded there to be little point in struggling for change from within the
 existing system, even where this would have been, in earlier years tolerated. The
 development and growth of feminist educational theory and practice has largely
 taken place either outside formal educational institutions altogether or on the
 fringes of further and higher education. The gradual integration of women's
 studies into mainstream academe may continue to occasion mistrust within some
 feminist circles-and legitimately so-but it has also resulted, positively, in a
 renewed effort to change educational structure and practice from within, as
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 354 L. A. Chisholm &J. Holland
 witnessed by a mushrooming of both grassroots and academic research initiatives
 directed towards developing good educational practice in anti-sexist terms. The
 task is not an easy one:
 Feminism is... a revolutionary movement... if feminism had remained
 outside educational institutions its model could still constitute a threat,
 but the fact that it has moved inside as well... makes it an even greater
 threat. (Spender, 1981: 170)
 A growing body of work catalogues the male-dominated character of education;
 important examples in this field are Byrne (1978), Spender (1982) and Weiner
 (1985). Considerable research from differing perspectives has established the
 patterning of reproduction of sex roles and gender division through the organisa-
 tion and interactional practices of the school, through teachers as agents, and
 through both the overt and hidden curriculum (for example, Wolpe, 1977;
 Delamont, 1980; Deem, 1980; MacDonald, 1981; Smail et al., 1982; Pratt et al.,
 1984; Davies, 1985). Grassroots recognition of the positioning of girls in and
 through education and attempts to counter this process have been a growing
 feature of the past decade. Whyld (1983) and Weiner (1985) in particular offer
 descriptions of some of this influential, pioneering anti-sexist work in schools: the
 best known of projects of this type are DASI, GATE, and GIST. The growth of
 feminist educational theory and practice has been a support for and a recipient of
 the fruits of these efforts. More recently, guided by the principle of equal
 opportunities and as a result of pressure from feminists, support has come from
 formal structures of education such as LEAs, some of which have produced anti-
 sexist policy statements, and/or appointed individuals with a responsibility for
 dealing with the issue of gender in education. (See Whyte et al. (1985) for some
 descriptions of this type of initiative.)
 It is well established that since the 1944 Education Act the argument for
 equality of opportunity in education has moved from one focusing on equality of
 access to one based on equality of outcomes. The underlying rationale has
 changed from meritocratic to egalitarian, culminating in the introduction of
 positive discrimination, in the form (initially) of Educational Priority Areas. But it
 was class inequality which was under attack in these years, with race and gender as
 latecomers in the struggle for equality of educational provision (Halsey, 1972;
 Finch, 1984). The 1975 Sex Discrimination Act enjoins the provision of equal
 educational and training opportunities in both principle and practice. Ten years
 on it is clear that legislation has not been notably successful in attaining this state
 of affairs (Weiner, 1978, 1985). It is argued, furthermore, that the concept of
 equal opportunities is not adequate as a framework for countering sex discrimina-
 tion and women's disadvantage; a specifically anti-sexist education is called for:
 ... to make up for past discriminatory experiences... [and placing]
 patriarchy, power and women's subordination.., at the centre of [our]
 thinking... Expanding educational opportunity is not just a question of
 juggling resources or rearranging option choices... boys and men will
 have to give up their hold on the system-something they are unlikely to
 do without a struggle. The major concern [is] to place girls and women
 at the centre rather than at the periphery of the classroom and so
 challenge the dominance of male experience. (Weiner, 1985: 7, 9, 10)
 Positive discrimination for girls to redress the imbalance of educational proThis content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Girls and Occupational Choice 355
 vision and experience between the sexes, despite official LEA policy statements
 (e.g. ILEA, 1985) does not enjoy wide support from teachers, parents, or pupils.
 It is quite clear that as far as gender is concerned the struggle to gain real
 acceptance of even the equal opportunity principle, in whatever variant, contin-
 ues within the schools.
 In a project such as ours, it is a continuing struggle simply to keep the focus of
 the curriculum development on girls, from the initial level of securing funding
 right through to the level of the individual teacher and actual classroom practices.
 There are powerful barriers to the development of curricula oriented towards
 female experience. First, the individual child-centred ethic of the teaching profes-
 sion militates against an understanding of structural inequalities and what would
 appear to be the advantaging of one group over another. Secondly, classroom
 practice and pedagogy are predicated upon male experience (Spender & Sarah,
 1980; Stanworth, 1981; Whyte, 1986). The combination of these two elements
 produces a multiplier rather than an additive effect. This can be illustrated by the
 following quote from a teacher:
 the boys in my group were not desperately involved in the whole project,
 it was something to do and they had to do it. But initially they didn't
 really think it was for them. That visit [to a nursery] gave a whole
 different outlook to the programme... We do hope to get some
 feedback from the male staff on what would be interesting to put into a
 programme to make it more appealing for the boys. It is probably
 because I am a man, but I feel the boys have more to learn and more to
 gain by breaking down restrictive male sex role stereotypes.
 As Weiner (1985) points out, men and boys are not going to give up their
 patriarchal privileges without a struggle, however well-disposed towards feminism
 they may individually be. Nor is it practically possible to conform to the ideal
 principles of educational action research, of feminist research, or of good anti-
 sexist practice, in the real worlds of researchers and teachers.
 This article will locate the Girls and Occupational Choice project in the broader
 context, describe the collaboration in schools to produce anti-sexist curricula, and
 consider some of the methodological issues arising from this form of action
 research. It is one account of the attempt to juggle theory and practice.
 A Description of the Girls and Occupational Choice Project
 The Project in Context
 A crucial aspect of women's disadvantage lies in their labour market position. The
 stereotypical division between women's work and men's work is, unlike many
 aspects of sex role stereotyping, firmly rooted in reality. Women are found in a
 very limited range of industries and occupations; latest UK Census figures show
 that both manual and non-manual women workers are each concentrated in
 merely three occupational categories (DoE, 1984). Within occupational categories
 and organisations, women are disproportionately represented in the lower levels
 of both command and skill hierarchies; education itself provides an excellent
 example of this distribution, with recent analyses suggesting a worsening of the
 situation over the next decade (see NUT/EOC, 1980; TES, 1983; ILEA, 1984).
 Despite the Equal Pay Act, women's pay levels remain resolutely below those of
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 356 L. A. Chisholm &J. Holland
 men (currently stabilised at about 73-75% of male rates for full-time adult
 workers' gross hourly earnings). Access to post school educational and training
 courses for women remains restricted by many factors.
 Severe horizontal and vertical segregation persists in the labour market (David-
 son & Cooper, 1984) and the channelling which girls experience in education and
 training appears to fit most of them for only this limited range. Education is then,
 a crucial part of the social reproductive cycle and from a sociological perspective
 a logical intervention point to effect change. What we wanted to do in the project
 was to use the socialising potential of the school to counter, rather than reinforce,
 sex stereotypical experiences and responses.
 Specifically our objectives were two fold.
 (i) The pure (as opposed to applied) research aspect of the project consists of
 an investigation of the processes which girls of 11-16 go through in making
 decisions about their future work. Theory and data in this area are limited, and
 we saw this part of the study as primarily theory generating. The target group was
 working-class girls, with boys included for comparative purposes.
 In this discussion, however, we focus upon:
 (ii) The action research which involves the development and evaluation of
 intervention strategies for 11-14 year olds aimed at breaking down sex stereotypi-
 cal occupational choice. The proposal for curriculum development was thus
 researcher initiated, but premised upon close collaboration with teachers. This
 was not therefore a wholly grassroots initiative and could only approximate to the
 ideals of the teacher-researcher movement (Stenhouse, 1975; Elliott, 1978; Elliott
 & Ebbutt, 1985).
 In effect the project was proposing a type of school based curriculum innova-
 tion and change in which strategies specific to the particular context could be
 devised and implemented using the resources of existing institutions and sup-
 ported by the research team. For us it seemed clear that this could only take place
 on the basis of collaborative work with volunteer teachers committed to the
 project's aims. This precludes the notion of ideological neutrality on the part of
 the teacher. On the contrary, we hoped that commitment to positive action for
 girls would form a basis for solidarity and partnership in the teacher/researcher
 teams.
 Research Design and Methods
 We saw our role as facilitative, working in equal partnership with the teachers
 together devising and implementing a curriculum unit. Added to a shared
 political commitment, we envisaged an easing of the potential tensions typically
 found in relations between researchers and teachers (e.g. Shipman, 1975).
 The project as a whole has assembled research data on approximately 1000
 girls and boys aged 11-16 in four state comprehensives, three co-educational and
 one single sex girls school, all predominantly working class. We have worked with
 children in the first, third and fifth years in these schools over a period of three
 years. A partially overlapping but largely different and smaller number of
 children experienced the curriculum development aspect of the project's work.
 This has ranged from 100 children in the first year of the project, to roughly 350
 in the third year. We began to work full-scale with one girls' and one mixed
 comprehensive school; we planned to do pure research only in a third (mixed)
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Girls and Occupational Choice 357
 school; we used a fourth school as a control, to provide basic information on job
 aspirations and destinations. We currently work fully with three of the schools,
 one remaining a pure research context only. The emerging strength of the
 project has been its intensive and collaborative nature. We had originally in-
 tended to expand into more schools, but the teachers' industrial action has
 limited our capacity to fulfil this part of our research plan. Table I outlines the
 research design, giving an indication of the research tasks undertaken in each
 school in each year of the project.
 TABLE I. Research activities in the schools
 School A School B School C School D
 Intervention/ Intervention/ Control/ Control/Pure
 Pure Research Pure Research Pure Research Research/Intervention
 Single sex girls Mixed Mixed Mixed
 Year of Project 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3
 Research Activity
 Intervention
 Programme developed and
 transmitted x x x x x x
 Transmission of programme
 monitored x x x
 Pre/post intervention
 questionnaires x x x x x x x
 Pure Research
 Questionnaires, interviews x x x x x x x x x x x
 School leavers occupational
 destinations x x x x x x
 The project employed a range of qualitative and quantitative research methods
 (see Holland & Chisholm, 1985 for a description of the methods used). The initial
 intention had been to feed back findings from the 'pure' research into the action
 research cycle, but the greediness of the action research in terms of time and
 energy has meant that this feedback has been less systematic than we had hoped.
 Curriculum intervention was never for us an end in itself, but a means to an
 end: changing the children's attitudes and perceptions relating to gender divi-
 sions and stereotyping, their level of information in crucial areas to do with
 women's work, and indeed ultimately, their occupational choices. We had objec-
 tives, and the efficacy of the content and transmission of the intervention
 programmes which were developed could be measured in these terms. To that
 extent an objectives model of evaluation can be applied. In fact we have pre- and
 post-tested participating children and suitable control groups to assess change in
 these areas. Equally important has been detailed feedback from the teachers on
 all aspects of the implementation of the programmes. More than eighty percent
 of the lessons in the second year of the project have been monitored. Small
 groups of the children have also been interviewed by independent researchers
 shortly after the end of the intervention programmes. Evaluation of the effects of
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 358 L. A. Chisholm &J. Holland
 the intervention has then an 'objectives' element, combined with teachers' subjec-
 tive experience and evaluation, pupils' responses and views, and observation by
 researchers.
 During the whole process the research team were a constant presence in the
 schools, including active engagement in additional activities associated with the
 intervention such as taking the children on visits or accompanying visitors to the
 school. The detailed record of these encounters will provide an ethnography of
 the participating schools, a "thick description" (Geertz, 1973: 5).
 The Curriculum Development Process and Content
 In the first year of the project we met weekly with our working party of
 committed teachers in each school to discuss the characteristics and problems of
 the school and pupils, and what the teachers considered important to cover in the
 intervention curriculum. The working party developed a scheme outlining the
 objectives of the curriculum unit in that school context, the issues which were to
 be covered to deal with these objectives, and the lesson content which would be
 required. Teachers were to plan and teach the lessons, researchers provided
 materials and an extensive backup programme of visitors, visits, videos and other
 activities. The intervention programmes typically contained sessions on stereo-
 types and sex roles, women's work, and work and its implications for our lives.
 Over the period of research both content and style of development varied in the
 different contexts. In some instances teachers wanted a very specific programme
 with detailed lessons plans, in others they wanted to be able to construct their
 own lessons from a range of materials and ideas which we provided on the basic
 themes to be covered (cf. Holland et al. (1985) for further detail on the
 programmes and teachers' comments).
 The curriculum units were implemented in the schools in a variety of ways: for
 example in a regular slot each week, as part of the pastoral programme, or social
 education; as the programme for one particular department for a set period; or
 inserted into the timetable of particular teachers who were working with us and
 would provide the time. The departments to which we gravitated in practice were
 English or Humanities. Careers programmes in which we might have expected to
 find a home are not generally provided in schools for the age groups with which
 we worked. In fact, teachers frequently objected to the introduction of issues
 relating to work with such young children but to us it was crucial to reach the
 girls prior to the point at which they choose subjects for follow through to public
 examinations. At this point they typically drop those subjects which could
 potentially lead to a wider range of occupational possibilities. Pratt et al. (1984)
 have documented patterns of option choice, which are still radically gender
 differentiated. Girls opt for art, languages and domestic subjects, boys for
 science, maths and technology.
 Girls and Occupational Choice as Feminist Action Research
 in the Educational Context
 Action research is a broad church (Kelly, 1983) in definition and in practice, but
 the unifying objective can be seen as fostering change during the course of the
 research process, which includes monitoring or evaluating the change processes
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Girls and Occupational Choice 359
 or outcomes. But the two elements of this style of investigation can sometimes
 prove 'uneasy bedfellows' (Cohen & Manion, 1980).
 In principle action research is predicated on collaboration, negotiation and
 reflexivity, and ideally there should be constant interaction between the research
 function and the action. Action research, as a site for the generation of grounded
 theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Glaser, 1978) particularly in the context of
 education, could provide a mode of enquiry which might narrow the gap between
 theory and practice. What are the obstacles to this happy synthesis?
 From the perspective of the researcher engaged in action research in educa-
 tion, three intersecting problems can be identified:
 (1) the research act as a controlled activity, or one which is as far as possible
 under the control of the researcher;
 (2) the relationship between theory and practice;
 (3) the issue of outcomes and generalisability.
 These lead inexorably to the nature of collaborative work between researchers
 and practitioners, always crucial in action research but particularly significant in
 work which attempts to incorporate feminist practice.
 Research as a Controlled Activity
 In principle research activity involves a systematic, .rigorous and verifiable investi-
 gation and interpretation of events and processes. Within a specified set of
 assumptions and qualifications, it aims to produce an explanation for some aspect
 of social reality which is plausible and potentially generalisable. This model
 presupposes that the researcher has control over the research act. In contrast,
 action research is engaged, interactive; if genuine collaboration between resear-
 cher and practitioner is to take place, control cannot reside in one set of hands.
 The changing locus of control is not merely a matter of perceived or actual
 hierarchy amongst the participants, or of political power games. Interestingly
 enough we might define success as the moment when the researcher sees the
 research design slipping away and the action taking over. We certainly experi-
 enced this.
 Perhaps the solution to this dilemma at a general level lies in the reconceptuali-
 sation of research and research method. Stenhouse (1975) has attempted this for
 educational research by defining it as applied research concerned with the
 selection and justification of practice in individual instances. But for Stenhouse
 himself this does not mean relinquishing precision, clarity and potential abstrac-
 tion. In other words a flexible research design and an interactional, processual
 approach to the action research endeavour does not preclude theoretical develop-
 ment and generalisable findings.
 Relationship between Theory and Practice
 At the level of practice the relationship between theory and practice is elided with
 the relationship between researchers and practitioners. Educational theory is
 typically seen as divorced from practice and generally irrelevant by and for
 educational practitioners. This is part of a deeper suspicion of researchers on the
 part of teachers which may be related to issues of autonomy, competence and
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 360 L. A. Chisholm &J. Holland
 expertise (Hargreaves, 1982), or even exploitation and denigration. But what
 might also be at issue is the kind of knowledge about education which we are
 interested in producing and why that knowledge might be useful. Much practi-
 tioner antipathy towards educational research is rooted in the conviction that the
 'hypothetico-deductive' or 'statistical' paradigm informing a good deal of educa-
 tional research is simply inappropriate for the study of educational structure and
 process, at least in a way relevant to educational practice. In the vision of the
 teacher-researcher movement, all educational research should be action research,
 with the objective of supporting the judgements of practitioners and encouraging
 systematic critical reflection on practice (Elliott, 1981). Theory would be the
 handmaiden of practice, so that, for example, Nixon (1981) removes the resear-
 cher entirely from educational research activity, maintaining that a practitioner
 can readily acquire research skills simply by doing research.
 The 'terrors' of the theory/practice split have led to what has appeared to be an
 action research imperative in feminist research (Mies, 1983) and a focus on the
 nature of research relations, with the emphasis on symmetrical democratic
 relationships between professional women researchers and their lay research
 partners (Oakley, 1981; Stanley & Wise, 1983). The debate continues, and it is
 clear that no easy solutions exist.
 The Issue of Outcomes and Generalisability
 The focus in action research is on processes rather than objectives. Often
 outcomes cannot be predicted or perhaps specifically defined in advance, al-
 though it is clear that every action research project must have an overarching
 framework of general aims, objectives and desirable outcomes, to be worth
 embarking on. Change processes can be monitored and explanations offered for
 what happens, but this lack of specified behavioural or institutional outcomes,
 allied with the case specific nature of the processes under investigation, is often
 pointed to as evidence of the unproductiveness and ungeneralisability of action
 research. But perhaps it is the failure to communicate the outcomes of action
 research satisfactorily which is at fault here, and it is at this point that theorising
 is important.
 Using the collaborative process and anti-sexist work as the linking theme, these
 three interrelated methodological/political issues for educational and feminist
 action research can be passed through the filter of our experience. Transformed
 in this way they indicate characteristic imperfections of action research in
 practice:
 (1) researchers deceive themselves that they are creating democratic, symmetri-
 cal research relations, ignoring the nature of structural and power relation-
 ships which must exist amongst the groups involved;
 (2) researchers hide or deny their 'theoretical' concerns, which can lead to
 naive empiricism, or an inability to communicate the fruits of the research
 beyond the participating group;
 (3) action research projects can gradually separate into their two primary
 elements; the intended interaction or synthesis of research and action
 disppears, and the representatives of each element work in parallel, possibly
 harmoniously, but not collaboratively.
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Girls and Occupational Choice 361
 We have said that our intention was to work as equal partners with teachers
 committed to the overall objectives of the project in the curriculum development
 part of the project. In practice the situation was somewhat different. In some
 instances the teachers who volunteered for our working parties were indeed
 deeply committed to the principles on which the project was based, and worked
 tirelessly towards the realisation of our joint aims. In other instances this was
 simply not so. At the extreme we found an equal opportunities argument being
 used to counter attempts at positive action (see Stoney (1984) for similar
 experiences with respect to the selective use of the Sex Discrimination Act as a
 counter for positive action for women in Further Education). But more generally
 the teachers committed to an individual child centred approach and to co-
 education were wary of using gender as a discriminator for differential behaviour
 towards the children, and indeed of giving girls something which they were not
 giving to the boys. In one instance we wanted to introduce single sex sessions for
 some issues, recognising their value for girls. (Evidence both in support and
 denial of this proposition has in fact been produced, see Dale (1969, 1971, 1974),
 Spender & Sarah (1980), Deem (1984) and Mahony (1985).) The teachers were
 not attuned to noticing gender specific classroom interaction patterns, nor to
 considering the implications of these interaction patterns for teaching and
 learning, and regarded single sex activities as divisive. We tried to persuade them
 to attempt single sex sessions. Ultimately some agreed, if reluctantly, and it was
 only their own successful experience which served to change their views on the
 issue.
 The development of productive research relations to some extent was compli-
 cated by the traditional suspicion which teachers have of educational researchers,
 and a negative evaluation of the research activity itself. As we intimated earlier,
 within this lie issues of professional competence. We negotiated a path between
 two equally undesirable identities, that of being considered self interested re-
 search students (and therefore unimportant or possibly irrelevant), or outside
 curriculum development experts from a respected educational institution who
 could absolve the teachers of the necessity of contributing to the curriculum
 development, by virtue of their expertise. In addition teachers who were highly
 competent in their own subject areas feared incompetence in teaching about what
 was for many the new and unexplored area of gender relations. Whilst we never
 intended to teach the intervention curricula we were sometimes pressured to do
 SO.
 Issues of power relations and control over the research activity came to the
 fore when in one school the teachers decided to jettison the research design, one
 of them voicing the group view:
 I want to get it into the regular curriculum and reaching as many kids as
 possible, not stick to the research design. You know, we can do it on our
 own now-we just needed something to get us going, and you have done
 just that.
 In the event we reached a negotiated settlement recognising the contributions of
 each party.
 Losing 'conventional' researcher control over the action research process led to
 outcomes which we could predict, and considered undesirable, but this was
 unavoidable in terms of the nature of research relations which had developed,
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 362 L. A. Chisholm &J. Holland
 and did lead to raised awareness for all participants. For example, in the second
 year of the project, a group of teachers were informed by their female year and
 school heads that they must teach the intervention programme developed by the
 teacher/researcher working party in the first year. The timing was such that they
 experienced minimal induction into the ideas involved, despite researcher at-
 tempts to enable this. Apart from two fully committed women, all of these
 teachers were men. Whilst implementation of the curriculum intervention was by
 no means optimal, in the event these men went through the process of confront-
 ing and working through the issues involved in an anti-sexist programme at a
 personal and pedagogic level whilst actually teaching it. Consciousness raising for
 teachers has been an unintended consequence of the project as originally envi-
 saged, and it was certainly never intended that this should take place in the
 classroom. Subsequently the researchers were able to insist on an intensive period
 of collaborative work, allowing time for the teachers to consider their own
 thoughts, feelings and problems with the issues raised by the programme aims
 and content, as well as to plan the programme itself. A further group of
 predominantly male teachers taught another version of the programme in this
 school. The first group of men-experiencing fear of incompetence in teaching
 the content of the intervention curriculum-had reacted initially with hostility
 towards the programme and project, and this second group also had difficulty
 because the material was "so different from what we are used to". But the quality
 of the researcher/teacher relationship was such that the issues could be explored;
 the men were reflective on their own practice, and planned to incorporate what
 they learned from this experience into their teaching at all levels in the school.
 They commented for example:
 We all like to think we're good, we don't make mistakes, we're not sexist
 or racist, we're not impatient with the kids, never give them a hard time
 for no good reason-but a programme like this does make you think.
 I think that the real impact of this will be on us, me and other members
 of staff... you could say that my attitude prior to the programe has
 most definitely changed. I'm more acutely aware of the injustice... I
 really do feel that I have gone beyond making crass statements about
 sexism and inequality-this experience has changed me, and to some
 extent the other staff.
 In this instance it was the assymetry of research relations in one respect that
 created change in the direction of the overall aims of the action research.
 The research team made it quite clear from the beginning that there was a
 'pure' research aspect to the project, and that they were sociologists interested in
 generalisations and theorising from the findings of this particular piece of
 research. The research had a very clearly specified design, and the pure research
 aspect was always entirely controlled by the research team, with the necessary
 logistical and organisational support of the teachers. In line with teachers'
 ambivalence towards educational research, we were charged on occasion with
 planning the study purely to create an academic treatise, or with using esoteric
 sociological abstraction and jargon. But when asked by an outsider whether
 sociologists are useful in curriculum development with teachers, one of our
 teachers replied:
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Girls and Occupational Choice 363
 Yes, because teachers tend to operate on a practical rather than concep-
 tual level, and they tend to rely on anecdote. Sociologists can give us an
 overview and a systematic approach. The researchers were able to put
 our thoughts and enthusiasm into systematic perspective.
 In some instances it was true, however, that although we were fully open about
 our research aims, teachers were not necessarily particularly interested or in-
 volved in this aspect of the work. We would have welcomed their involvement. In
 some of our research arenas the teachers were happy to deny or ignore the pure
 research aspect of the project, and to focus on what was for them of major
 concern, curriculum development and the additional resources available in their
 school through the project.
 Separation between research and action was in effect structurally incorporated
 into the project. The pure research was in the hands of the researchers, who
 planned to feed it back into the action research cycle, and the action research in
 the hands of the teacher/researcher teams, in interaction, as has been demon-
 strated above. The researcher commitment to and involvement in the action
 aspect of the project left little time to analyse research data thoroughly during the
 heat of the action! But feedback from the observations and researcher evaluation
 of the curriculum development and implementation phases of the action research
 was continuous, particularly during the massively monitored curriculum interven-
 tion phase in the second year of the project.
 We have experienced both separation and combination of action and research.
 In some cases, in the second year of the project, the teachers supported us
 throughout in pursuit of our pure research goals, and encouraged the develop-
 ment of the intervention curriculum, but have increasingly left the actual curricu-
 lum development task in the hands of the research team. At first it seemed to us
 that this was a case of a split between research and action, researchers and
 teachers. Later reflection suggested that in fact the teachers were facilitating our
 research input into the school in a context in which they found it difficult to
 undertake such initiatives directly themselves.
 In other cases, where good research relations had been established, we have
 been able to return to schools with questions raised in the analysis of our
 questionnaires, asking whether the teachers would be interested in collecting
 supplementary data for us from the children. Although at meetings the entire
 spectrum of arguments used against the educational research activity might have
 been rehearsed, in fact these teachers were interested in the nature and meaning
 of the research activity, the generation of data and its interpretation and use, and
 were happy to engage in this process themselves.
 Conclusion
 It would be foolhardy to imagine that a ten-week anti-sexist curriculum interven-
 tion unit could generate dramatic change in terms of the objectives which this
 study set itself, changes in occupational choice, in the face of the material and
 ideological bombardment into gender identities and roles to which these girls
 (and boys) are subjected in the rest of their lives. But recognition of the enormity
 of the problem in its macro social context should not preclude the attempt at
 change at the micro level. Academic discussion of action research strategy is
 inclined to revolve around the hypothetical ideal case: for schools, an open
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 364 L. A. Chisholm &J. Holland
 structure with democratic leadership, a confident and committed staff, and a
 liberal local political climate. But the ideal type was never intended to describe
 reality; it is a tool for conceptual analysis in the light of which actual cases are
 analysed and understood, not measured against. Recommended practice derived
 from ideal types is unsatisfactory; the discovery of diverse practices for diverse
 realities is the more appropriate task. But as others have noted, "... how to
 evaluate what we have achieved is a more complex problem. Psychologically there
 is a tendency to swing between euphoria and depression" (Ord & Quigley, 1985:
 118). In projects such as this ".... the process of change has not been one of
 evolutionary progression, rather of short jumps forward at specific moments in
 time and then possibly two steps back" (Battersea County Women's Group, 1985:
 123). Or as one teacher has said:
 A programme like this can have some impact in helping you to look at
 other things. It doesn't itself change anything. The danger always is that
 we're going to overestimate our influence, and the importance of this or
 any input or any one teacher. Here it's just a spark, sometimes it
 catches, sometimes it doesn't... I'm not actually adding very much to
 the girls' power. I don't think you can-they have their own. So it comes
 down to trying to deflate the worst of what the boys do and occasionally
 attempting to make spaces for the girls to speak in.
 But to conclude in the words of another teacher:
 The issue of gender is very close to home for these children. Compared
 with the other things I've done... I've not had the same reaction at all,
 even when they disagreed... You were touching nerves.
 Correspondence: Lynne A. Chisholm & Janet Holland, Department of the Sociology
 of Education, University of London, Institute of Education, 57 Gordon Square,
 London WC1H ONT, England.
 REFERENCES
 BATrERSEA COUNTY WOMEN'S GROUP (1985) A school experience: implementing equality in a mixed
 comprehensive, in: G. WEINER (Ed.) Just a Bunch of Girls (Milton Keynes, Open University Press).
 BYRNE, E. (1978) Women and Education (London, Tavistock).
 COHEN, L. & MANION, L. (1980) Research Methods in Education (Beckenham, Croom Helm).
 DALE, R.R. (1969) Mixed or Single-sex Schools?, Volume I; also Volume II (1971) and Volume III
 (1974) (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul).
 DAVIDSON, M.J. & COOPER, C.L. (1984) (Eds) Working Women: an international survey (Chichester,
 Wiley).
 DAVIES, L. (1984) Pupil Power: deviance and gender in school (Lewes, Falmer Press).
 DEEM, R. (1980) (Ed.) Schooling for Women's Work (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul).
 DEEM, R. (1984) (Ed.) Co-education Reconsidered (Milton Keynes, Open University Press).
 DELAMONT, S. (1980) Sex Roles and the School (London, Methuen).
 DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND SCIENCE (1984) New Earnings Survey (London, HMSO).
 ELLIOTr, J. (1978) What is action research in schools?, Journal of Curriculum Studies, 10, pp. 355-357.
 ELLIOTr, J. (1981) Foreword, in: J. NIXON (1981) A Teacher's Guide to Action Research (London, Grant
 McIntyre).
 ELLIOTr, J. & EBBUTr, D. (1985) Facilitating Educational Action Research in Schools (York, Longman).
 FINCH, J. (1984) Education as Social Policy (Harlow, Longman).
 GEERTZ, C. (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures (New York, Basic Books).
 GLASER, B.G. & STRAUSS, A.L. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: strategies of qualitative research
 (London, Weidenfeld & Nicolson).
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 Girls and Occupational Choice 365
 GLASER, B.G. (1978) Advances in the Methodology of Grounded Theory: theoretical sensitivity (Mill Valley,
 The Sociology Press).
 HALSEY, A.H. (1972) Educational Priority, Volume I (London, HMSO).
 HARGREAVES, D. (1982) The Challenge for the Comprehensive School (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul).
 HOLLAND, J. & CHISHOLM, L.A. (1985) Girls and Occupational Choice: a brief description of the first
 eighteen months of the project, Girls and Occupational Choice Working Paper 6 (London, University of
 London Institute of Education).
 HOLLAND, J. et al. (1985) A Woman's Place: strategies for change in the educational context, Girls and
 Occupational Choice Working Paper 4 (London, University of London Institute of Education).
 INNER LONDON EDUCATION AUTHORITY (1984) Improving Secondary Schools (The Hargreaves Report)
 (London, ILEA).
 INNER LONDON EDUCATION AUTHORITY (1985) Sex, Race, Sex and Class 6: a policy for equality (London,
 ILEA).
 KELLY, A. (1983) Action research: some definitions and descriptions (Paper presented at Qualitative
 Methodology and the Study of Education Seminar, Whitelands College, London, July).
 MACDONALD, M. (1981) Class, Gender and Education (Milton Keynes, Open University Press).
 MACDONALD, B. & RUDDOCK, J. (1971) Curriculum research and development projects: barriers to
 success, British Journal of Educational Psychology, 41, pp. 148-154.
 MAHONEY, P. (1985) Schools for the Boys? Co-education Reassessed (London, Hutchinson).
 MIES, M. (1983) Towards a methodology for feminist research, in: G. BOWLES & R. DUELLI-KLEIN
 Theories of Women's Studies (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul).
 NIXON, J. (Ed.) (1981) A Teacher's Guide to Action Research (London, Grant McIntyre).
 NATIONAL UNION OF TEACHERS/EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES COMMISSION (1980) Promotion and the Woman
 Teacher (Manchester, EOC).
 OAKLEY, A. (1981) Interviewing women: a contradiction in terms, in: H. ROBERTS (Ed.) Doing Feminist
 Research (London, Routledge & Kegan Paul).
 ORD, F. & QUIGLEY, J. (1985) Anti-sexism as good educational practice: what can feminists realistically
 achieve?, in: G. WEINER (Ed.) Just a Bunch of Girls (Milton Keynes, Open University Press).
 PRATT, J., BLOOMFIELD, J. & SEALE, C. (1984) Option Choice: a question of equal opportunities (London,
 Nelson/NFER).
 SHIPMAN, M.D. (with BOLAM, D. & JENKINS, D.) (1974) Inside a Curriculum Project: a case study in the
 process of curriculum change (London, Methuen).
 SMAIL, B., WHYTE, J. & KELLY, A. (1982) Girls into Science and Technology: the first two years, EOC
 Research Bulletin, 6, pp. 1-15.
 SPENDER, D. (1981) Education: the patriarchal paradigm and the response to feminism, in: D. SPENDER
 (Ed.) Mens Studies Modified, pp. 155-174 (Oxford, Pergamon).
 SPENDER, D. (1982) Invisible Women (London, Writers and Readers Publishing Co-operative).
 SPENDER, D. & SARAH, E. (Eds) (1980) Learning to Lose: sexism and education (London, The Women's
 Press).
 STANLEY, L. & WISE, S. (1983) Breaking Out: feminist consciousness and feminist research (London,
 Routledge & Kegan Paul).
 STANWORTH, M. (1981) Gender and Schooling: a study of sexual divisions in the classroom, Explorations in
 Feminism No. 7 (London, Women's Research and Resources Centre).
 STENHOUSE, L. (1975) An Introduction to Curriculum Research and Development (London, Heinemann).
 STONEY, S.M. (1984) Girls Entering Science and Technology: the problems and possibilities for action
 as viewed from the FE perspective, paper given at EOC/Manchester Poly Girl-Friendly Schooling
 Conference, September.
 THE TIMES EDUCATIONAL SUPPLEMENT (1983) Protest over head's appointment (24 June) and: Continu-
 ing fall in number of women who become heads (29 July).
 WEINER, G. (1978) Education and the Sex Discrimination Act, Educational Research, 20, pp. 163-173.
 WEINER, G. (1985) Just a Bunch of Girls (Milton Keynes, Open University Press).
 WHYLD, J. (1983) Sexism in the Secondary Curriculum (London, Harper & Row).
 WHYTE, J. (1986) Girls into Science and Technology: the story of a project (London, Routledge & Kegan
 Paul).
 WHYTE, J., DEEM, R., KANT, L. & CRUICKSHANK, M. (1985) Girl-friendly Schooling (London, Methuen).
 WOLPE, A.M. (1977) Some Processes in Sexist Education, Explorations in Feminism 1 (London, Women's
 Research and Resources Centre).
This content downloaded from 128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:33:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms