Career Communications Group
[title]Women in FINTECHAuthor(s): Lango Deen
[content]Source: Women of Color Magazine , Vol. 19, No. 1 (SPRING 2019), pp. 20-23
Published by: Career Communications Group
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/26652803
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Career Communications Group is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend
access to Women of Color Magazine
This content downloaded from
128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:24:13 UTC
All use subject to h
ON JANUARY 16, CONGRESSWOMAN MAXINE WATERS OUTLINED
THE AGENDA IN HER FIRST SPEECH AS COMMITTEE CHAIRWOMAN OF THE
POWERFUL HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES.
Women FINTECH
IN
 20 ‹ WOMENOFCOLOR | SPRING 2019 www.womenofcolor.net
by Lango Deen
ldeen@ccgmag.com
This content downloaded from
128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:24:13 UTC
All use subject to h
www.womenofcolor.online WOMENOFCOLOR | SPRING 2019 › 21
The first woman and first
African American to serve on the
Financial Services Committee, Waters has taken on critical
issues on behalf of consumers, investors, and vulnerable
American families. Her track record includes serving as one
of the authors of Section 1116 of the Housing and Economic
Recovery Act, which requires Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac,
and federal home loan banks to promote diversity and
the inclusion of women and minorities in all activities, and
Section 342 of the Dodd-Frank Act.
In her speech, Waters said the Dodd-Frank Wall Street
Reform and Consumer Protection Act had helped improve
accountability in the financial system and protect consumers,
investors, and the economy. Her new bill, the Consumers
First Act, will reintroduce protections for the Consumer
Finance Bureau.
‘THE GROWTH OF FINANCIAL TECHNOLOGY’
Waters announced that her ongoing priority is financial
regulation that protects consumers, investors, and the
economy.
“One emerging area the Financial Services Committee will
be paying very close attention to is the growth of financial
technology or so-called fintech firms,” she said.
“As Americans are banking and accessing credit in new
ways, it is important that we encourage responsible
innovation with the appropriate safeguards in place to protect
consumers and without displacing community banks and
credit unions.”
Waters has “great hopes that fintech firms can open up
opportunities for those who have been excluded from access
to responsible credit,” but she believes that as the fintech
sector grows, the Committee will make sure that regulators
eliminate the risks, and meet the opportunities.
The new chairwoman plans to scrutinize credit reporting in
the wake of the Equifax data breach.
“For the sake of consumers across the country, credit
reporting needs a comprehensive overhaul,” she said.
Other important issues that will get renewed attention from
the Financial Services Committee is housing and the housing
finance system.
“The financial crisis was driven by predatory lending, the
private market packaging those toxic, risky loans into
securities and then selling those securities to unsuspecting
investors,” she said.
DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION
As chairwoman, Waters will continue to work on diversity
and inclusion.
Recently, the Government Accountability Office (GAO) found
a continued trend of low representation of minorities and
women in the financial services industry and unusually low
representation at the senior management levels within the
financial services industry.
“This needs to change,” she said. “Diverse representation in
these institutions, and particularly at the management level,
is essential to ensure that all consumers have fair access to
credit, capital and banking, and financial services.”
Turning to federal financial services agencies, Waters said
the Office of Minority and Women Inclusion and others
have the important responsibility of overseeing all diversity
matters in management, employment, and business
activities at their agencies.
“The creation of these offices was a major step forward,”
she said. “But we all know that laws that promote
racial, ethnic, and gender equality are only as strong as
the implementation and enforcement of those laws.
And congressional oversight is essential to ensure that
implementation and enforcement are strong.”
Waters recently announced a new Subcommittee on
Diversity and Inclusion. “It is a new day in Congress and for
the House Committee on Financial Services.”
‘THE TIME TO HELP ADVANCE WOMEN IS NOW’
According to a new report from Goldman Sachs’ Global Markets
Institute, the fact that women make up about 40 percent of
employees at S&P 1500 firms—but only 6 percent of CEOs—
suggests that adjusting hiring practices can’t be the cure-all.
“IT IS A NEW DAY IN CONGRESS AND FOR THE
HOUSE COMMITTEE ON FINANCIAL SERVICES.”
—Maxine Waters
This content downloaded from
128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:24:13 UTC
All use subject to h
22 ‹ WOMENOFCOLOR | SPRING 2019 www.womenofcolor.online
“The time to help women employees, clients, and
consumers is now,” says Samantha Saperstein, head of
Women on the Move, JPMorgan Chase. “JPMorgan Chase
is committed to this effort, and I believe our approach will
create meaningful change in people’s lives.”
According to its website, Women on the Move started in
2013.
During a listening tour to exchange ideas with 6,000 female
employees, leaders identified the barriers to advancement
and meaningful change.
Women on the Move reports that today its gender
diversity initiatives include an interactive network, a vibrant
community made up of thousands of people across all levels
and regions, who meet regularly for discussions, training,
and networking opportunities.
“Having seen so much change in this industry, it’s really
important to be engaged in the conversation. I want to
see more people like me in financial services,” Gretchen
Gardinier told Melissa Brandon for Charles Schwab.
Gardinier is a financial professional at Charles Schwab &
Co., Inc. Now a managing director of investor services, she’s
been at Schwab for more than 17 years.
“I’ve been a people leader at Schwab for a long time—it’s
taught me a lot,” she said. “As a leader, I’ve learned that it’s
okay to ask for help. Being vulnerable is okay. It’s okay not to
have all the answers.”
MENTORS AND SPONSORS
Annie Liu, vice president, and regional market executive for
Charles Schwab’s Pacific Northwest Region, stresses the
importance of mentors and sponsors.
“So many people have helped me along the way,” Liu said.
“I couldn’t have done this on my own, and it empowers
me to pay it forward. I want to leverage my voice and my
experience to help women that want to be in the financial
services industry.”
One of the executive sponsors of Schwab’s diversity
strategy to support a unique and diverse workforce, she
says, “We are a gender-neutral firm. When it comes to
career opportunities, it’s not who you are, or what color you
are. It’s what you bring to the table and how you can make
an impact. We work with our people, and we support our
people.”
VALUES AND CULTURE
Amy Ruegg, vice president of specialized solutions and
product integration at Schwab, left corporate life to raise her
three children and work part-time.
“When I decided to come back to corporate life, it was
easy to choose Schwab because of our values and culture,”
Ruegg said.
Synchrony, also on the list of companies with a powerful
woman in finance in 2018, has more than 16,000 employees.
The company made the Working Mother 100 Best
Companies 2018, has been named to the American Banker
Most Powerful Women for 11 consecutive years, and has
made Best for Vets Employers, 2018 Military Times.
CLOSING THE GENDER GAPS: ADVANCING WOMEN IN
CORPORATE AMERICA
In Closing the Gender Gaps: Advancing Women in Corporate
America, the authors focus on some of the key issues they
believe will require attention.
The report says that if women are to have the same
opportunities as men regarding position, pay, and promotion,
leading to a greater number of women at the top of
corporate America, companies should review:
» Recruiting processes
» Internal compensation data, and practices
» Leadership development programs
» Evaluation and promotion processes
» Organizational structures and practices
» Representation of women on boards of directors
» Programs that enable women to “upshift” after having
downshifted
» Boards should develop robust metrics and strengthen
their internal data-gathering and analytics.
» Tailored support for women can include mentoring,
coaching, and networking programs and senior-level
sponsorship, as well as higher visibility of successful
role models.
» Family-friendly policies can include paid parental
leave, flexible working hours and arrangements, the
opportunity for part-time work, and emergency childcare,
among others.
» When employees work part-time, employers should
protect the part-time nature of the job as much as is
feasible.
» Beyond changes in the workplace, companies that want
to strengthen their pipelines of female talent for senior
positions can also develop or support industry initiatives
and take on public policy advocacy on a host of issues,
including family care and tax policy, among others.
» Data availability on recruiting, retention, promotion,
seniority, and pay. More robust and standardized public
disclosures on gender issues.
» Employers can facilitate or subsidize childcare.
» Mandated paid family leave programs can help
individuals while spreading the costs. 
This content downloaded from
128.2.149.6 on Fri, 18 Oct 2019 16:24:13 UTC
All use subject to h